---
layout: game
tags: [ steam, square enix, jrpg, classics ]
game_completed_date: 2026-04-01
game_cover_art: https://images.igdb.com/igdb/image/upload/t_cover_big/co87df.jpg
game_like: true
game_status: beaten
game_platform: Steam
game_score: 4
game_time:  "28h 36m"
game_title: "Chrono Trigger"
---
Chrono Trigger is a game that lives up to its reputation as an all-time classic, even experienced 30 years later for the first time.

In contrast to many RPGs, Chrono Trigger is incredibly tightly paced.  While I did find that it took a while to get the story going, once it's going there's not much in the way of filler to be found.  Of course, given its roughly 25-hour runtime, there's not a lot of room for filler and also telling the whole story. And I think the game benefited from the designers' choice to keep everything focused on story elements and not require a ton of grinding or meaningless side quests.  In fact, I never found that I needed to grind at all to proceed in the game; there were no major difficulty spikes, and my characters were naturally leveling up enough to take on each successive challenge.  Additionally, for the most part you aren't going to stumble across a random encounter on the map as was common in some older RPGs, which also helps keep the game driving forward instead of getting dragged down in battle after battle.

The beginning, where you are hopping through different time periods to meet the various characters that make up your party, dragged on a bit for me. I was starting to question why this was considered such a classic game.  Once you've met everyone, however, and you start to solve problems across time periods, it really kicks into gear.

The time travel mechanics are quite clever, in that you can do things in the past to affect the future (not thinking too closely about any of the paradoxes this introduces), and conversely things you do in the future do not affect the past.  If you interact with a chest in the past to activate it, but do not take the item out, that item will have grown stronger in that same chest in the future.

This system is really highlighted in one of the better side quests in the game, where you need to get and power up the moon stone.  When you get the stone, you learn that it will take something on the order of 65 million years to power up.  Naturally, the thing to do is to go back in time 65 million years and let it have the charge time it needs.  However, other characters interfere with the charging across the eras, so you'll need to travel through time to keep the charging on track.  It's a great example of the game really integrating time travel rather than just using it for flavor.

The cast of characters in Chrono Trigger is quite good, with each of them getting a lot of development throughout the plot of the game.  All the characters have unique backstories and reasons for being part of the party, and each of them also gets further fleshed out through a side quest near the end of the game.

Chrono Trigger is famous for its music, and it still stands out even today.  The 16-bit art mostly still works, although there were several times that the art made the level layout unclear.  For instance, in 2300 AD it was often hard for me to discern when there were upper and lower platforms available in the level from the artwork.  Animations, while limited in number, also hold up very well over time.

The battle system here took a bit to get used to, but it was a lot of fun once I got the hang of it.  The combination of it being turn-based, where each character gets to take an action based upon when their action bar fills up, and also real-time, where everyone's action bars are going to continue to fill up while you select what you want to do from the menus, was something I hadn't experienced before.  It keeps the battles interesting because this system requires you to be thinking ahead about what you want each of your characters' next moves to be so that you don't waste a lot of time when their action bar fills.

Another highlight of the combat system was that Chrono Trigger uses physical placement in space as a way to keep the various combat encounters different and interesting.  Different attacks you have may affect different spatial layouts of enemies, for instance every enemy in a straight line or every enemy within a circle.  The same holds true for attacks that the enemies can hit you with.  Although the actual layout of the characters and enemies on the screen did seem to be somewhat randomly determined, the fact that the same encounter with different geometry could benefit from different approaches helps to keep things from getting monotonous as well.  By the end of the game, however, most of my most powerful attacks hit all enemies, and so the geometry stopped mattering as much for battle plans.

Chrono Trigger also has the interesting system of dual and triple techs, which help make party composition more interesting than just selecting which individual skills and attributes you want to have available to you at any given time.  As they complete more and more battles together, combinations of teammates will unlock special attacks that are only available when that combination is in your party.  Since you already had to earn tech points with the combination of characters in order to unlock the dual or triple tech, that means that your most useful combinations increase their usefulness by adding more powerful attacks when you keep them together.

While there is no mistaking that Chrono Trigger is a game from 1995, I did appreciate that the Steam version added the bookmark feature as a quality of life improvement.  Not only did it let me make one-off saves and quit the game even if I wasn't at one of the designated save points, but it also automatically made a bookmark for me just before several of the more difficult battles, meaning that when I lost the battle I did not lose a ton of progress and have to redo a lot of work to try again.  I can imagine how frustrating the distance from save point to major battle would have been in the original release, and I'm glad that it's not a problem in the Steam version.

Two quality of life features that I wish were in the game are maps and a quest log.  There were several times in my playthrough that I took a decent-sized break between sessions, and needed a refresher as to what I should be doing next.  Chrono Trigger typically communicates your next objective through non-repeatable dialog as you proceed through the story.  While you can discover what a good next move is at the End of Time, it's not always possible to go back there, and having something in the menu that I could pull up to remind me what the next objective is would have been very helpful.

The overworlds for each time period are not huge, but they're not tiny either.  Additionally, once you gain the ability to move around the overworld at will, you discover that they are spheres and therefore wrap around themselves on both axes; if you go too far west you wind up on the far east of the world, and if you go too far north you wind up on the south of the world.  This makes it easy to get a bit confused about where you are in the space.  That there are no fewer than 6 overworld maps to navigate, and that all of them are variations of the same world, means that you have a lot of different layouts to commit to memory.  Having the ability to pull up a world map would have helped me quite a bit.

I know that Chrono Trigger is well-known for having multiple different endings. I only played through to the main ending; I have not gone back and done a new game plus run to see any of the others.  It's possible I'll revisit my save in the future to do this, but while I enjoyed my time with the game, I wasn't compelled to play through it again to unlock the various alternate endings.

I was skeptical over the first few hours of playing Chrono Trigger, but as I got deeper into the plot it became apparent to me why this is considered a true classic by so many people.  The tight pacing, story, memorable characters, excellent music, and fun battle system really stand out.  Having to always think ahead in battle really prevents this from falling into just monotonously navigating menus to pick actions.  While it's not perfect, some of the art makes the levels hard to decode, and there were a few missing quality of life features I would have loved to have seen, Chrono Trigger was a blast to play.  I'm 30 years late to the party, but better late than never!
